+++
title = "Sel-sel hematopoietik"
+++

[[Kembali ke Menu]](/HIS/)

[◄ Previous: K-1 Diferensiasi sel hematopoietik](/HIS/k1/) | [Next: K-3 Fisiologi sel darah merah ►](/HIS/k3/)


### Blood Components
* Plasma:
	* This is the fluid component of the blood.
	* It contains salts and organic compounds such as amino acids, lipids, vitamins, proteins, and hormones.
	* In the absence of an anticoagulant, cellular elements clot in a test tube.
* Serum:
	* Serum is essentially fibrinogen-free plasma.
* Cellular Elements:
	* These include Erythrocytes (Red Blood Cells), Leukocytes (White Blood Cells), and Platelets. Platelets are notable as they are not considered a cell. Leukocytes are further categorized into Granulocytes and Agranulocytes.
	* Granulocytes include Neutrophils, Eosinophils, and Basophils.
	* Agranulocytes include Lymphocytes and Monocytes.

Microscopic examination of circulating blood cells is typically conducted by evenly smearing a drop of blood on a glass slide, followed by air-drying the preparation. This prepared slide is then stained with Romanovsky stain, which is a mixture of methylene blue and eosin. Currently, most laboratories opt to use the Wright or Giemsa modifications of the original Romanovsky procedure for staining. The staining principles involve methylene blue, which stains acidic cellular components blue. Eosin, on the other hand, stains alkaline components pink. Additionally, azures, which are substances formed when methylene blue is oxidized, color other components a reddish blue by binding to them.

Erythrocytes (Red Blood Cells / RBCs)
* Characteristics:
	* They are biconcave-shaped disks, with a diameter of 7.5 µm (or 7-8 µm) and a thickness of 2.0 µm at its widest and less than 1 µm at its center.
	* This shape provides a large surface area relative to volume, enhancing gaseous exchange capability.
	* Mature, circulating erythrocytes are non-nucleated and lack organelles. Although precursor cells in bone marrow have nuclei and organelles, they expel them before entering circulation.
	* When stained with Giemsa or Wright stains, RBCs display a salmon-pink color.
	* They consist only of a plasma membrane, underlying cytoskeleton, hemoglobin (Hb), and glycolytic enzymes.
	* RBCs circulate for approximately 120 days.
	* Senescent (aging) RBCs are removed by phagocytosis or destroyed by hemolysis in the spleen.

* Reticulocytes:
	* RBCs in circulation are replaced by reticulocytes.
	* Reticulocytes complete their hemoglobin synthesis and maturation 1-2 days after entering circulation.
	* They account for 1-2% of circulating RBCs.

Leukocytes
* General Characteristics:
	* Normal count is 6000-10000/mm³.
	* Leukocytes are capable of leaving the bloodstream (diapedesis) and entering connective tissue.
	* Categorized as Granulocytes (possessing primary and specific cytoplasmic granules) and Agranulocytes (possessing only primary granules).


* Granulocytes: </br>
	Have a multilobed nucleus and vary in lifespan. They are distinguished by their cytoplasmic granules.
	* Neutrophils:
		* Possess a lobulated nucleus, usually 2-5 lobules.
		* Comprise 60-70% of circulating leukocytes.
		* Have a lifespan of 6-7 hours in blood, but may live over 4 days in connective tissue.
		* Their size is 12-15 µm.
	* Eosinophils:
		* Characterized by a bilobed nucleus.
		* Their granules are large, refractile, and stain red in blood smears.
		* Account for 2-4% of circulating leukocytes.
		* May also leave the circulation to enter connective tissue.
		* They are the first line of defense against parasites and participate in triggering bronchial asthma.
	* Basophils:
		* Have a bilobed nucleus that is often obscured by large, metachromatic cytoplasmic granules.
		* Constitute only 1% of circulating leukocytes.
		* May leave the bloodstream to enter connective tissue and resemble mast cells.
		* They play a role in immediate and delayed hypersensitivity.
	
* Agranulocytes </br>
	Round or indented nucleus, contain only lysosomal-type, primary granules.
	* Lymphocytes
		* Account for 24-44% of circulating leukocytes
		* Nucleus is round and slightly dented
		* Basophilic cytoplasm, appearing as a thin rim around the nucleus
		* 97% of all lymphocytes are made up of small lymphocyte (6-8 µm), while 3% are large lymphocyte (9-12 µm)
		
		T and B Lymphocytes: </br>
		* T originates in the bone marrow and mature in the thymus
		* B originate in the bone marrow and are carried in the blood to lymphoid tissues and organs, where they become activated and proliferate, transform into plasma cells in connective tissue, and provide humoral immunity by secreting antibodies.
	
	* Monocytes
		* Account for 3-8% of circulating leukocytes
		* Nucleus is kidney-shaped or oval
		* Small cytoplasmic granules
		* Circulate in blood for 12-100 hours, then enter connective tissue
		* If migrate into connective tissue is called a macrophage, if migrate into bone is called an osteoclast
		* Size is 9-12 µm
		
Platelet 
* Small cytoplasmic fragment derived from the megakaryocyte